RHIDP-7834-RHIDP-7634-RHIDP-598 Refactor authenticating with RHBK (#1231)
redhat-developer/red-hat-developers-documentation-rhdh: modules/authentication/proc-enabling-user-authentication-with-rhbk.adoc

[id="enabling-user-authentication-with-rhbk"]
= Enabling user authentication with {rhbk-brand-name} ({rhbk})

To authenticate users with {rhbk-brand-name} ({rhbk}), enable and configure the OpenID Connect (OIDC) authentication provider in {product} and provision the users and groups from {rhbk} to the {product-short} software catalog.

.Prerequisites
* You link:{configuring-book-url}[added a custom {product-short} application configuration], and have sufficient permissions to modify it.
* You have sufficient permissions in {rhsso} to create and manage a realm.

> Alternatively, you can ask your {rhbk} administrator to prepare the required {rhbk} App.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, your {rhbk} administrator can prepare the required {rhbk} application for you.
```
Passive voice and is _RHBK App_ the actual name of the application?

. To add your {rhsso} credentials to {product-short}, add the following key/value pairs to link:{configuring-dynamic-plugins-book-url}#provisioning-your-custom-configuration[your {product-short} secrets].
You can use these secrets in the {product-short} configuration files by using their respective environment variable name.
+
`AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_CLIENT_ID`::
Enter the saved **Client ID**.

`AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET`::
Enter the saved **Client Secret**.

`AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_METADATA_URL`::
Enter the saved **{rhbk} realm base URL**.

. Enable the Keycloak organization plugin (`backstage-plugin-catalog-backend-module-keycloak-dynamic`).
The plugin is named after {rhbk} upstream project.
This plugin ingests {rhbk} users and groups to the {product-short} software catalog.
+
.`dynamic-plugins.yaml` file fragment
[source,yaml]
----
plugins:
  - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/backstage-plugin-catalog-backend-module-keycloak-dynamic'
    disabled: false
----

. To provision {rhbk} users and groups to the {product-short} software catalog, add the `catalog.providers.keycloakOrg` section to your custom {product-short} `{my-app-config-file}` configuration file:
+

> --
> [id=keycloakOrgProviderId]
> .`{my-app-config-file}` fragment with mandatory `keycloakOrg` fields
> [source,yaml]
> ----
> catalog:
>   providers:
>     keycloakOrg:
>       default:
>         baseUrl: ${AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_METADATA_URL}
>         clientId: ${AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_CLIENT_ID}
>         clientSecret: ${AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET}
> ----
> 
> `baseUrl`::
> Your {rhbk} server URL, defined when xref:enabling-user-authentication-with-rhbk[enabling authentication with {rhbk}].
> 
> `clientId`::
> Your {product-short} application client ID in {rhbk}, defined when xref:enabling-user-authentication-with-rhbk[enabling authentication with {rhbk}].
> 
> `clientSecret`::
> Your {product-short} application client secret in {rhbk}, defined when xref:enabling-user-authentication-with-rhbk[enabling authentication with {rhbk}].
> 
> Optional: Consider adding the following optional fields:
> 
> `realm`::
> Realm to synchronize.
> Default value: `master`.
> +
> .`{my-app-config-file}` fragment with optional `realm` field
> [source,yaml]
> ----
> catalog:
>   providers:
>     keycloakOrg:
>       default:
>         realm: master
> ----
> 
> `loginRealm`::
> Realm used to authenticate.
> Default value: `master`.
> +
> .`{my-app-config-file}` fragment with optional `loginRealm` field
> [source,yaml]
> ----
> catalog:
>   providers:
>     keycloakOrg:
>       default:
>         loginRealm: master
> ----
> 
> `userQuerySize`::

Author: ```suggestion
--
[id=keycloakOrgProviderId]
.`{my-app-config-file}` fragment with mandatory `keycloakOrg` fields
[source,yaml]
----
catalog:
  providers:
    keycloakOrg:
      default:
        baseUrl: ${AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_METADATA_URL}
        clientId: ${AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_CLIENT_ID}
        clientSecret: ${AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET}
        realm: master
        loginRealm: master
----

`baseUrl`::
Enter your {rhbk} server URL, defined when xref:enabling-user-authentication-with-rhbk[enabling authentication with {rhbk}].

`clientId`::
Enter your {product-short} application client ID in {rhbk}, defined when xref:enabling-user-authentication-with-rhbk[enabling authentication with {rhbk}].

`clientSecret`::
Enter your {product-short} application client secret in {rhbk}, defined when xref:enabling-user-authentication-with-rhbk[enabling authentication with {rhbk}].

`realm`::
Enter the realm name to provision users, such as `master`.

`loginRealm`::
Enter the realm name to authenticate users, such as `master`.

Optional: Consider adding the following optional fields:

`userQuerySize`::
```

> ----

Reviewer 2: `realm` and `loginRealm` are not optional params

User number to query simultaneously.
Default value: `100`.
+
.`{my-app-config-file}` fragment with optional `userQuerySize` field
[source,yaml]
----
catalog:
  providers:
    keycloakOrg:
      default:
        userQuerySize: 100
----

`groupQuerySize`::
Group number to query simultaneously.
Default value: `100`.
+
.`{my-app-config-file}` fragment with optional `groupQuerySize` field
[source,yaml]
----
catalog:
  providers:
    keycloakOrg:
      default:
        groupQuerySize: 100
----

> `schedule.frequency`::

Author: @JessicaJHee Is schedule an optional section in the case of RHBK / Keycloak? Or is it a mandatory field like for GitHub?

Author: Answer from @JessicaJHee : yes, it's optional.

  providers:
    oidc:
      production:
        tokenSignedResponseAlg: ${AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_SIGNED_RESPONSE_ALG}
----

`additionalScopes`::

> {rhbk} scope.

Author: ```suggestion
Enter additional {rhbk} scopes to request for during the authentication flow.
```

  providers:
    oidc:
      production:
        tokenSignedResponseAlg: ${AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_SIGNED_RESPONSE_ALG}
----

`additionalScopes`::
Enter additional {rhbk} scopes to request for during the authentication flow.
+

> .`{my-app-config-file}` fragment with optional `scope` field

Author: ```suggestion
.`{my-app-config-file}` fragment with optional `additionalScopes` field
```

  providers:
    oidc:
      production:
        tokenSignedResponseAlg: ${AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_SIGNED_RESPONSE_ALG}
----

> `scope`::

Author: ```suggestion
`additionalScopes`::
```

  providers:
    oidc:
      production:

>         scope: ${AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_SCOPE}

Author: ```suggestion
        additionalScopes: ${AUTHENTICATION_OIDC_SCOPE}
```

`resolver`::::
Enter the sign-in resolver name.
Available values:

> `oidcSubClaimMatchingKeycloakUserId`:::::

Author: That's a ccutil tooling bug. But you are right: the production tooling might have the same bug.

====

.Verification

. To verify user and group provisioning, check the console logs.
+
.Successful synchronization example:
[source,json]
----
{"class":"KeycloakOrgEntityProvider","level":"info","message":"Read 3 Keycloak users and 2 Keycloak groups in 1.5 seconds. Committing...","plugin":"catalog","service":"backstage","taskId":"KeycloakOrgEntityProvider:default:refresh","taskInstanceId":"bf0467ff-8ac4-4702-911c-380270e44dea","timestamp":"2024-09-25 13:58:04"}

> {"class":"KeycloakOrgEntityProvider","level":"info","message":"Committed 3 Keycloak users and 2 Keycloak groups in 0.0 seconds.","plugin":"catalog","service":"backstage","taskId":"KeycloakOrgEntityProvider:default:refresh","taskInstanceId":"bf0467ff-8ac4-4702-911c-380270e44dea","timestamp":"2024-09-25 13:58:04"}

Reviewer 2: `2025-06-27T16:02:34.647Z catalog info Read 5 Keycloak users and 3 Keycloak groups in 0.4 seconds. Committing... class="KeycloakOrgEntityProvider" taskId="KeycloakOrgEntityProvider:default:refresh" taskInstanceId="db55c34b-46b3-402b-b12f-2fbc48498e82" trace_id="606f80a9ce00d1c86800718c4522f7c6" span_id="7ebc2a254a546e90" trace_flags="01"`

`2025-06-27T16:02:34.650Z catalog info Committed 5 Keycloak users and 3 Keycloak groups in 0.0 seconds. class="KeycloakOrgEntityProvider" taskId="KeycloakOrgEntityProvider:default:refresh" taskInstanceId="db55c34b-46b3-402b-b12f-2fbc48498e82" trace_id="606f80a9ce00d1c86800718c4522f7c6" span_id="7ebc2a254a546e90" trace_flags="01"`

> [source,json]
> ----
> {"class":"KeycloakOrgEntityProvider","level":"info","message":"Read 3 Keycloak users and 2 Keycloak groups in 1.5 seconds. Committing...","plugin":"catalog","service":"backstage","taskId":"KeycloakOrgEntityProvider:default:refresh","taskInstanceId":"bf0467ff-8ac4-4702-911c-380270e44dea","timestamp":"2024-09-25 13:58:04"}
> {"class":"KeycloakOrgEntityProvider","level":"info","message":"Committed 3 Keycloak users and 2 Keycloak groups in 0.0 seconds.","plugin":"catalog","service":"backstage","taskId":"KeycloakOrgEntityProvider:default:refresh","taskInstanceId":"bf0467ff-8ac4-4702-911c-380270e44dea","timestamp":"2024-09-25 13:58:04"}
> ----

Author: ```suggestion
[source]
----
2025-06-27T16:02:34.647Z catalog info Read 5 Keycloak users and 3 Keycloak groups in 0.4 seconds. Committing... class="KeycloakOrgEntityProvider" taskId="KeycloakOrgEntityProvider:default:refresh" taskInstanceId="db55c34b-46b3-402b-b12f-2fbc48498e82" trace_id="606f80a9ce00d1c86800718c4522f7c6" span_id="7ebc2a254a546e90" trace_flags="01"

2025-06-27T16:02:34.650Z catalog info Committed 5 Keycloak users and 3 Keycloak groups in 0.0 seconds. class="KeycloakOrgEntityProvider" taskId="KeycloakOrgEntityProvider:default:refresh" taskInstanceId="db55c34b-46b3-402b-b12f-2fbc48498e82" trace_id="606f80a9ce00d1c86800718c4522f7c6" span_id="7ebc2a254a546e90" trace_flags="01"
----
```
